[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Jonathan Young.
I'm a psychologist and founding
curator of the Joseph Campbell
Archive.
My area of study is
the mythic imagination,
both in ancient cultures
and contemporary times.
I had been studying
the connection
between psychological experience
and the mythological texts
for some time.
My teacher was Rollo May, who
is well known in this area.
And a friend was
bringing Joseph Campbell
to Santa Barbara, where I
lived, to present workshops
and asked me to help.
And once I got into conversation
with Joseph Campbell,
it changed everything.
Joseph Campbell gave me a
religious sense of life back.
He showed how the old stories
and the modern imagination,
movies, whatever we
look at, has patterns.
He taught what you might
call a picture language,
how to understand the
symbols of everyday life
as representing something
beyond themselves,
as alluding to invisible worlds.
Whether we think of that as
spiritual or psychological
isn't as important
as that we have
some kind of openness
to it, that we know
more than we know that we know.
I am attracted to the poets,
the writers, and the artists.
And Joseph Campbell
thought they would
be able to see the future.
They were the best guides to
what has not yet happened,
what others do not yet see.
Is America a great country
because of political leaders
like Lincoln?
Sure, but actually, our
consciousness, our personality,
is more shaped by Mark
Twain and Emily Dickinson
and the great painters and
the great dramatists, Eugene
O'Neill.
They will give us
the inner life that
will be necessary to become
who we might be able to become.
One thing studying
myth will do is
make us aware that
nothing is entirely new,
that any experience
we have been facing
is something that has
happened to others
and they have struggled with
and they have left clues.
So, mythology helps us get
through everyday challenges.
We can see the guidance that
has been left to us from those
who came this way before.
And it is interpreted
primarily through imagery.
A picture carries
thousand words,
and if we can study what
the pictures in old stories,
dreams, movies,
culture at any time,
what the images are telling
us, we can understand things
on deeper levels.
Joseph Campbell had
a best selling book
in 1949 called "The
Hero with 1,000 Faces."
That is to say stories
are similar over time
and in different cultures.
And there is one main
story, the mono myth,
that is told again and again.
It's essentially a
journey story, a quest.
When you diagram
the hero's journey,
it's customarily
depicted as a circle.
You start at the top.
A calling takes you
away from the ordinary,
and there is a descent.
You cross a threshold into a
place you have not been before.
There are companions, allies,
mentors, and opponents.
There are ordeals.
There is a good
deal of suffering.
At the bottom, the nadir,
the dark night of the soul--
it gets really hard.
There is a death and
rebirth experience.
The redemption is the rising up
the other side of the circle.
And there are several lessons
to be learned on the way back.
Finally, a return
threshold crossing
when you re-enter
the place you left,
but you are changed forever.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When there are
difficult times, it
might be a vocational moment.
It could be that trouble
is calling us to a change.
If we don't have trouble, there
is no reason to learn anything.
We can stay in our comfort zone.
But when things
get difficult, we
might have to stretch and find
new ways of looking at things.
So what Joseph Campbell
referred to as "the calling"
is usually bad news.
Something goes wrong.
In a person's life, it's a
divorce or a financial setback
or an illness.
In a collective,
a community life,
it's a natural disaster
or a political shift
or a financial
crisis of some kind.
Something happens that
makes us start again.
And we have to go
looking for new answers.
So that is possibly what we have
in difficult times, a calling
to go, learn something new.
It could be that these moments--
and there is upheaval in
so many ways in the world
right now-- it could be
that this is a turning
point, a calling, that we are
being drawn over a threshold
into a new way of
looking at things.
That would be a positive
reading of contemporary events.
In the Old Testament, Samuel was
a boy that was given up to God.
That is, his mother
wanted him to be a priest.
To study the priesthood,
you went to the temple
and studied with
the high priest.
And so this boy was
a servant, but also
a student of the priest.
One night, Samuel
heard his name, Samuel.
So he ran in to ask
what the old man needed.
And this old man said,
I didn't call you.
Go back to bed.
The voice comes again, Samuel.
And the boy goes in.
What is it?
Oh, no, I didn't call you.
Go to bed.
The third time-- these
things always seem to happen
in threes--
Samuel.
And he comes in,
and I'm imagining
the old priest is still
awake from the last time.
But he said, I see that
you are hearing your name,
but I am not calling you.
God is calling you.
Go pray.
This is vocation.
This is the calling, the
thing that pulls us away
from the familiar and and
pulls us into development,
into becoming what we might be.
So there is a leaving.
In the story, he
leaves his mother.
In our lives, we leave the crib.
We leave the maternal.
We leave the goddess, the
original, divine oneness
that we experienced as infants.
Collectively, well,
in history, there
were times when the
sacred saturated community
life, everybody believed,
and everything was sacred.
And we came to a more
instrumental, practical,
technological way of
thinking about things.
And that is progress.
But something was lost.
So we go off into new
learning, and we find powers,
and we gain access to
mysteries, and we survive this.
We come back wiser for our
trouble, older and wiser,
and we make a new
life for ourselves
and for the community.
And then there is the question
of what was lost, what it cost.
And we need to revisit how
we have lost balance at times
and need to regain that.
There is the call to adventure.
And there are great
historical figures.
Joan of Arc heard voices and
went out and changed history.
Florence Nightingale
was touched.
Her heart was moved by the
suffering on the battlefield,
and she proceeded to invent
the discipline of nursing,
and many lives were saved.
Rosa Parks wanted
to sit down on a bus
and changed history in
her area in her time.
Marie Curie was a scientist.
She was interested
in new things,
and her discoveries,
which cost her her life,
have given us things
of great value.
So we have many
examples of those
who heard something that had
not yet happened and brought it
into being.
This is how history is changed.
The word "adventure"
sounds bold,
and the quest is very demanding.
It requires a great
deal of courage.
There is much
warrior language that
is used, but very seldom are
these journeys about going off
to war.
There may be fighting
with our demons
or struggling to free
ourselves from old thinking.
But boldness of one
kind or another,
whether it is physical strength
or, more often, moral courage,
that is, the ability to stand
up to the criticism of others,
the doubts of others and
our own doubts in order
to step into the new, that
is the warrior stance, which
we often use masculine
language for.
But it's not at
all unique to men.
We both need this,
as we both need
the tender and the creative,
the poetic, the delicate, what
we often associate with women.
But yes, at times
of crisis, we need
to take the stance, the
seeker's stance, that I must go,
I must find what
needs to be known.
We tend to cling to
our innocence, which
is a kind of ignorance, really.
It is sort of lovely,
but it's very limited.
So when faced with a big
adventure, a new learning
experience, we often
have reluctance.
Joseph Campbell
did not criticize
the seeker for hesitation.
He thought that was
actually an important stage
in the overall
success of the quest.
It's preparatory.
Its dress rehearsal.
It's a pilot study if
you're doing science.
These are important moments.
In history collectively, we
seem to learn the same lessons
again and again.
The call comes again.
Again we blow it.
We set up international
peace making bodies
and then don't fund them.
I mean, we have these mistakes
that seem to reappear.
And they often have to
do with an attachment
to innocence, an attachment
to an old way of looking
at something and a
mistrust of the possibility
that we could do things an
entirely new way that we might
be able to cooperate
with others.
Often the shift of
thinking, it has
to do with developmental
psychology.
Simple thinking is
very black and white.
There's us and them.
There is male and female.
There's night and day.
There's good and bad.
There are the good
guys and the bad guys.
That kind of thinking
is very limited.
It sounds-- mm.
It kind of sounds coherent,
but if you look closely,
things in reality
are seldom that tidy.
And the advance, the
big leap forward,
is to find a way to bridge
what seems opposite.
In international affairs,
that's the work of peacekeepers.
In our personal lives, it's to
get over ways we seem divided--
we seem to have an
angel on one shoulder,
a devil on the other--
to get all of our energies
cooperating and pulling
together in the same story.
In the Star Wars movie
"The Force Awakens,"
there is a junk collector.
She's very good at
treasure-finding.
That is, she's taking equipment
off of old wrecked space ships
and things.
And something happens
where she gets
involved in a bold action that
is far beyond her station.
There is a moment in that
story where a mentor figure,
Maz Kanata--
I think I'm saying it right--
shows her some things
in the basement.
She does not want to know them.
It is frightening when
our destiny is obvious,
because it seems larger
than we can handle.
It will involve integration.
If a person has identified with
the delicate and sensitive,
it will find it will require
discovering the bold.
If a person has been
bold their whole life,
they might have to go
find their poetic side,
because we will need
all of our energies
to accomplish the task.
In the initiatory adventure,
there are terrifying moments.
You will cross a threshold
or through a portal
or a doorway of some kind.
And there will be what is in
the story is called a threshold
guardian.
This is a monster
of some kind who
is telling you to turn back.
In "The Odyssey," it was
a great, towering figure
with one eye that was
ready to eat you alive.
So, if we make progress
through history,
it will always be
a dicey business.
There will be a very
risky experience, at least
from time to time.
There will be great wars.
So much of the challenge
of human history
has to do with crowding.
The shift from the
matriarchal to the patriarchal
probably had to do with
increased population.
It's easy to get
along if there's
a lot of space between us.
As we start sharing resources
and they become more scarce,
water and things
like that, then we
begin setting up boundaries
and fighting over them.
So, the big challenge coming up
is, again, increased crowding.
How will we live
well together if we
were packed in in big
cities that go on forever?
All good stories have
allies, lots of them.
Tom Sawyer has Huckleberry Finn.
The Little Women are a group.
It seems like our lives
are solitary adventures,
that a hero's journey refers
to one seeker or traveler.
But in fact, these things
are done in groups.
The stories of the
Knights of the Roundtable
are groups of knights going
out to solve problems and be
of service.
So we need to be
good team players.
And we will find them at
moments of difficulty, that is,
when you're studying
for a final.
That's when you make your best
friend for life in college
or high school because it's
a shared crisis and you have
a shared enemy, the teacher.
So we rise together, and
we work well together.
The fantasy of
individual identity
is a huge problem to overcome.
The innermost cave
is our own fear,
that is, individually the
things that go bump in the night
deep inside of each of us.
Collectively, the innermost
cave would be the unknown,
and we are constantly
facing the unknown,
and it seems like
history is speeding up,
so we're facing it more often.
And we need to be wise
as we let go of old ideas
and trusting that new
possibilities will
emerge that are every bit
as good and probably better.
The real challenge is control.
The real challenge
is being able to let
go of what we know how to do and
our smugness and our attachment
to it and our arrogance, that
it is the best idea ever thought
of, and realize there is always
going to be something better.
Finally, things fall apart.
It is a death experience.
It is the death of old ideas.
It is the death of how we
have been looking at ourselves
individually and collectively.
Jonah ends up in the
belly of the great fish.
Little Red Riding is in
the belly of the wolf.
That is, the belly of the beast
is being devoured by change,
being devoured by our fears.
And it would seem in a rational
story that's the end, that's
a tragic end to the story.
You've just died.
But these are magical
stories, or at least they
are maps that point us past what
we have known how to control.
So we have the
potential of rebirth.
We might come back
from this end point
and have a whole new
story to live out.
And hopefully, we will learn
from our previous arrogance
and our previous
mistakes so that we
don't head straight
into death again,
that perhaps we
can set out things
that will work a little better.
To people who have always
seen things a certain way,
that one group is better than
another group or things are
done a certain way,
it feels terrible
when these ideas are shaken.
But they really must go.
We are very slowly
and begrudgingly
moving a little more
toward equality.
We don't have as many kings
and queens on the planet.
We have democracies
run by regular people,
and we see ourselves
close to equal.
And yet there is
an old hierarchy
that dies hard that is not
going away very quickly.
And every now and then,
there's a step back,
where people will
try to reconstitute
very old ideas that weren't
very good even in their time.
So, progress is always two
steps forward and one step back.
And the fact that there
is a reversal does not
mean the whole story is over.
It's just a temporary setback.
It is death-like, though.
The people that
have had privilege
and have to lose some of it
feel like they're being cheated.
In fact, they've been
cheating all along,
so the change is
toward fairness.
But it doesn't feel like
that to the person that
is losing some advantage.
The metaphor of death
might involve real death.
That is, there might be illness
or wars or injury of some kind.
But it really represents
something dying.
It's a view.
It's a belief system.
It's a certain perspective.
And it's for the best.
It doesn't feel like
that, but later, you
see that it makes space.
The dying make space for
something to be born,
something better.
There is a moment of empowerment
in the mythic journey.
It is something that the
individual experiences
and we experience in teams
and communities as well.
It is often pictured as
receiving a special weapon
or tool, a sword or
a new technology.
It really represents
a new skill,
that is, a new knowledge,
some kind of wisdom,
some kind of understanding
that will allow
us to build what is called for.
And so once we have the
weapon-- let's call it a sword
for symbolic reasons--
we are able to slice.
That's what a sword does.
It cuts it cuts away the old.
It cuts away the problem.
A cut is a way of
describing discernment.
When you cut this
away from that,
you make very difficult,
subtle decisions and choices.
And we have big choices
to make, both personally
and collectively in our times.
So gaining a new
technology, a new knowledge,
is what will help us
invent the future.
We think of technology as we
generally experience it now,
our new devices,
our new connections,
our new ways of communicating
and moving around.
They are our new
swords for our time
with which we can either
fight with each other
or build something
that works better
than anything we've had before.
On a personal level, the sword
is usually additional skills.
So you go to school and
learn how to do something.
And that allows you to
hold a different job
and make a different
contribution
and make some money
and build a family,
do the things that
need to be done.
So, learning is at the core
of the entire hero model.
It's learning, which
is to say changing.
And learning is a very
frustrating experience.
Some people love school,
and some people just
wonder why anybody
would go there.
It's so painful.
Of course it's painful.
It's a sustained experience
of feeling stupid.
And if you don't feel
stupid at school,
you're not doing it
right, because you're not
pushing hard enough.
If you read the harder
books and the harder books,
finally you've got a
book, and you open it up,
and it just says on the
page, you are so stupid,
which is to say
that's how it feels.
And that means I'm pushing
myself, I'm challenging,
and I'm reaching
for my capacity.
We want to become as well
learned as we can be,
as well developed as
we are capable of.
And that is some struggle.
That has certainly got
a lot of doubt in it.
We're going to be afraid.
You cannot do this without fear.
You're going to stumble
in your own dark places.
You're going to struggle
with your own demons,
all in claiming the sword,
the sword of effectiveness,
of ability utility would
be the word, the ability
to cause something to happen
in the world for the better.
In "The Lord of the
Rings," relatively early
in the adventure,
the mentor Gandalf
holds back to fight a monster
who would kill the whole team.
But he is quite a warrior, as
well as being a wise, old man.
And he allows all of his
friends and colleagues
to get through the
dangerous place
there while he fights the
fire monster and loses-- well,
I guess mutually
kill each other.
They both die.
And we, because
we are identifying
with Frodo and the
others on the team,
we go on without our
leader, without our teacher,
without the wisdom of
the previous generation.
We have great doubts
whether we know enough
because the
challenges are great.
Later in the story,
Gandalf returns.
It's a bit of a mystery how
he survived and came back.
And one little change,
his beard is now white.
His hair is now white.
And he explains, I am no
longer Gandalf the Gray.
I am now Gandalf
the White, which
is to say everyone changes,
even the leaders and teachers.
Everyone in a transformative
journey will be changing.
And the change
from gray to white
is kind of a purification.
But it is also a
gaining of wisdom.
And that is what is at
play in these stories.
If we survive, we should
be wiser for our trouble.
The defeat is horrible.
It feels like death
and is usually
described as a death
and rebirth experience.
Following that, you
have resurrection,
redemption, return.
These are slow
and painful steps.
But you realize
you're still alive
and that you have
gained something
for your trouble,
usually symbolized
as a sword, which is you
have new tools, new ways
of thinking, new
kinds of effectiveness
to use in the journey ahead.
And you begin to take steps
and realize you're strong.
You are stronger
for your trouble.
You make new allies.
You begin gaining steam here.
And there are new
problems to be solved.
The journey back is every bit as
long and taxing as the journey
to the depths.
The whole thing is
quite an ordeal.
But we are gaining something.
And there is no
other way to change.
Change is an insulting,
grueling experience.
But if we want to
maximize our potentials
there is no other thing to do.
As we realize we
are still alive,
we begin to return to the game.
We return to the place of
action, the battlefield,
if you take that metaphor,
the laboratory if you're
doing research.
We get back to our work.
But it's not the same person--
same face, same name.
Others may not
notice any change.
And the change may be subtle.
It might simply be
increased confidence.
It might be increased
hope or belief
that the project is worth doing.
But we do better at it.
And people look back
and say, couldn't I
have done this without
all of that ordeal?
Probably not.
There is no other
way to get away
from the past and
its limitations
and into the new potentialities.
I was the founding curator of
the Marija Gimbutas papers.
She was the leading
scholar on the goddess.
And her theory is
that some 3,000 years
before the common era, there
was a shift, that there
was a matriarchal
system socially
and a goddess
tradition religiously
that was the dominant
way of seeing things.
Things changed.
The male gods came.
Certain more masculine
ideas gained dominance.
The feminine did not go away.
It just didn't have the
leading edge anymore.
It was still very
strong and present
and a little bit underground.
There is a notion that
perhaps at some point
it will shift back.
Saying it in Hegelian terms, the
feminine would be the thesis,
the masculine would
be the antithesis,
and the synthesis
would be an integration
of the two, not a
return to the feminine,
but the best of both
working together
in a kind of
partnership culture.
A popular writer
Ryan Eisler wrote
"The Chalice and the
Blade," a retelling
of Gimbutas' theories.
And is an interesting
perspective on history.
We don't have good data.
The evidence for the
shifts 3,000 years
before the common era
is a little sketchy.
But whether it's good
history or just a notion
doesn't in the end matter.
It describes a loss
of certain values,
that they were underplayed and
need to come back into balance.
And that we know to be true.
What we sometimes
call the feminine
is probably all of the
internal values, the value
of subjectivity, of
emotionality, creativity,
the poetic things, the things
of beauty and tenderness.
They get trampled during
times of ambition.
And this is not unique to men.
Any ambitious person is
going to push themselves,
and they're going to
be rough and probably
accomplish some things, win,
be achieving some things.
And then at some point, probably
after we've arrived somewhere,
we might wonder,
what have I missed?
What else is there for me?
And we go back to some of
the things we set aside
because they weren't
convenient or efficient
or didn't seem like they
would help us toward our goals
and begin to bring them
back into our definition
of ourselves.
This is a stage of integration.
It's not that we shift values
and take a different side.
It's more that we try for
the holistic perspective.
During a time of
great growth, a nation
might be very instrumental,
very productive, a lot of energy
put into factories
and technology.
And then after we pollute
the air a little too much,
we might say, weren't
there some other things
we liked, walking in the
woods, enjoying a lake that
wasn't too polluted?
We might go back to
trusting nature and beauty
and the poetic side of
things collectively and find
some balance, not that we
tear the factories down,
but we build a
park next to them.
If we survive the ordeals, if
we return from the deathlike
moment, we have something
for our trouble,
sometimes called the boon or
the reward or the elixir--
a good word, the elixir,
a healing potion.
And it's symbolized
in some stories
as a vial of magical medicine.
But it is the wisdom.
It is the new way
of looking at things
that will allow us
to solve problems
that seemed intractable.
This is what we get.
And there isn't any
other way to get it.
It involves a radical and
disheveling learning process.
The elixir is not
the private property
of an individual
seeker or a group.
If some group stumbles
on some great idea,
they may hold the copyright
for a little while.
But ultimately, it
needs to be shared.
And the point is collective.
The point of the entire
initiatory adventure
is that we all gain in the
new idea, the new elixir that
can help.
In the large sense
collectively, if we
are able to come to the
elixir, a new philosophy
of living, what we will gain
is something like peace.
We will find an ability
to put up with people
who are different from us.
We will find an ability
on a personal level
to put up with the
parts of ourselves
we've never gotten
along with very well.
This is enormously important
in psychological work
on a personal level.
So if we find the elixir,
it will be shared.
It can be hoarded temporarily,
but it will come out.
And the advantage is
everyone benefits,
and we are all better off.
Apparently we need to learn
the same lessons over and over
again.
We are partly bold, brave,
smart adventurers and partly
silly fools that shoot
ourselves in the foot.
OK, we need to be humble,
and perhaps we are fools so
that we will stay humble.
There is great arrogance
if great power is gained,
and we have to
recover from that.
So, foolishness allows
us to laugh at ourselves.
And that's a sense
of fun and play.
We need that.
We can get overly serious and
take ourselves too seriously.
We need the generosity
of the fool,
the entertainer, the clown
who just wants to make people
happy, even though they
themselves might be a bit sad.
We need all of
that in ourselves.
So, yes, we need strong heroes,
and we need wonderful fools.
One of the great advantages
of studying the heroic journey
is that it is a quest model.
It's not a one right answer.
It suggests we need
different answers
for different stages
of the adventure,
that we will learn
different things and change.
It as a model involving change.
It says, you don't
know enough, not now.
You need to go learn
some more things
and that you can
see about where you
are in the progression
of the story.
And you can realize
this is not the end.
I may be in the belly
of the whale right now,
but in all those old stories
I read, you get out of that.
You live on.
The best part comes later.
This is enormously important
for people who are discouraged.
This is not the
end of the story.
It is time to pick up
ourselves and press on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]